---
layout: post
type: BlogPosting
published: true
title: "A New Vision for Management of Oceanographic Data and Information"
subtitle: "Welcome to the BCO-DMO Revolution"
description: "BCO-DMO crafts its vision for improved oceanographic data management"
date: 2022-03-17
lastModified: 2021-12-03 15:30:00
author: [danie]
category: news
tags: 
  - BCO-DMO
  - Adaptive Data Management
  - Vision
images:
  - id: bcodmo_logo
    primary: true
    path: ../bcodmo-logo.jpg
    url: https://www.bco-dmo.org
    border: false
  - id: bcodmo_datasets_overTime
    primary: true
    path: ../bcodmo_datasets_overTime.png
    border: false
    max-width: 512px
  - id: FAIRlogo
    primary: true
    path: ../FAIRlogo.jpg
    border: false
    max-width: 256px
    caption: Learn more about the FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship
    url: https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.18
  - id: SubmissionTool
    primary: true
    path: ../SubmissionTool.png
    border: false
    max-width: 512px
    caption: Our new submission tool is being user-tested now!
    url: https://submit.bco-dmo.org/
  - id: newWebsiteHome
    primary: true
    path: ../newWebsiteHome.png
    border: false
    max-width: 256px
    caption: Stay tuned for the launch of our new BCO-DMO website!
---
{% include image.html id="bcodmo_logo" position="right" %}
Welcome to our quiet revolution. When the {% include link.html external=true url="https://www.bco-dmo.org/" text="BCO-DMO" %} data repository was founded in 2006, 
it was somewhat of an arranged marriage and a novel experiment for the time: combine two existing, well-functioning, data management offices from two different,
long-standing, oceanographic research programs with a goal of gaining an economy of scale for NSF OCE’s data management needs. Turns out- it worked incredibly well. 
The BCO-DMO project team has been successfully collaborating with the oceanographic community ever since to help share its research output. An activity that has 
created a rich collection of marine and related data and information available for reuse in new scientific research. 

The original system created for BCO-DMO was designed to accommodate the research data of the times- small, consistently-formatted, and locally-managed datasets, 
such as cruise bottle and CTD files. The data were tabular, oftentimes shared via Excel spreadsheets. The overall size of the data collection was also much more 
manageable back then. But, today’s rapidly evolving research techniques and instruments are producing data that challenge this original paradigm; either through 
high volumes, complex types, or their distributed nature across multiple locations. BCO-DMO’s underlying system needs and catalog size began to outgrow its early 
strategies for serving, browsing and searching the catalog. With over 1,000 projects today, and a growth in dataset holdings of more than 60% over the last five 
years, browsing and using keyword searches to discover data had become arduous tasks.

{% include image.html id="bcodmo_datasets_overTime" position="left" %}

So, two years ago, BCO-DMO entered a very deliberate and rapid evolution, driven by the need to maintain the successful system and services built over the past 
fifteen years, but also to adapt to emerging needs of our research community by leveraging new technologies and best practices in data curation and publication. 

{% include image.html id="FAIRlogo" position="right" %}
Our approach to addressing these challenges is adaptive, to respond not only to where the various data types are stored (e.g., links to external raw DNA sequence 
or mass spectra data repositories), but also addresses their need for better documentation that will align with today's research data stewardship demands. To 
ensure that BCO-DMO’s highly valuable oceanographic datasets are FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable, {% include link.html external=true url="https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.18" text="Wilkinson et al., 2016" %}) for both human and machine use, we began 
rebuilding the entire system for flexibility in the submission, curation, and discovery of oceanographic data. This activity will increase our internal data 
processing efficiency and accuracy, leading to improved interoperability of BCO-DMO datasets and ultimately faster time to data publication. A key technological 
component of this effort is the adoption of a knowledge graph that will allow BCO-DMO to grow in a much more cost effective way. Knowledge graphs are powerful 
semantic tools in the quest to build a robust and flexible FAIR data system (and a great topic for another blog).

It’s a big departure from our old system, and the cliche that change is hard holds true even for repositories; but taking these hard steps now will result in a 
system that’s more effective, efficient, sustainable, and most importantly, easy to use. This concept of adaptive data management will underpin all our operations 
and forms the basis for our vision that we share below. Throughout our system redesign, we’ll continue our core operations to accept, process, and publish 
oceanographic research output by working closely with the individual scientists producing it; and as always, our activities continue to be framed in the context 
of the data lifecycle, with upcoming innovations aimed at supporting one or more of its phases. We’re excited to share some of our new system’s components and the 
data lifecycle stages they support; <strong>sneak peeks provided here...</strong>

---

**_Acquisition_**:  Beginning with data acquisition, we are collaborating with the community to create common data type models that can serve as templates that can help 
researchers early on in their data collection to ensure their data are well organized, described, and formatted for sharing. We plan to release one in each 
reporting year of our current grant, and our first successful collaboration was with ocean proteomics researchers.

{% include image.html id="SubmissionTool" position="right" %}

**_Contribution_**:  To make it as easy as possible for our research community to submit their data to us, we are implementing an online submission system to streamline 
the process of contributing data (stay tuned for its upcoming blog entry). The system serves as an alternative option to our current historical workflow, which 
involves PIs completing text-based metadata forms and emailing forms and data files to us via a dedicated address. Having multiple pathways for researchers to 
submit their data helps to further lower barriers to sharing data. This service is self-guided and web-based, allowing data contributors to upload their data and 
supplemental documentation, and pre-populate new metadata or copy relevant metadata from a previous contribution to a new one. Additional planned features will 
allow high level quality control on tabular data. Our overall goals being to save time for submitters, help expedite data processing, and provide transparency 
throughout the data submission process. You can check out this new system at: {% include link.html external=true url="https://submit.bco-dmo.org/" text="submit.bco-dmo.org" %} using your {% include link.html external=true url="https://orcid.org/" text="ORCiD" %} to log in (and can easily create your ORCiD at the login page if you don’t yet have one).

**_Publication_**: Preparing data for publishing is a task that underpins our role as a repository. In order to more effectively process data and information for 
publication, we recently implemented a web application called Laminar that creates Frictionlessdata Data Package Pipelines to help our data managers work more 
efficiently and consistently, while recording the provenance of their activities to support reproducibility. You can read more about this tool that resulted from 
our great collaboration with the Open Knowledge Foundation in our blog post: {% include link.html external=true url="https://blog.bco-dmo.org/2020/02/09/frictionless-data-pipelines-for-ocean-science" text="Frictionless Data Pipelines for Ocean Science" %} from 2020.02.09.

**_Discovery_**: An effective website is a main avenue of engagement for many organizations, but our previous site was becoming outdated and challenging to maintain. So, 
after much research and a fruitful partnership with {% include link.html external=true url="https://www.element84.com/" text="Element84" %}, we’re scheduled to soft launch our new website soon, which will be the keystone for enabling both human 
and machine access to BCO-DMO data and information. This new site has been designed with data contributors, data searchers, and proposal developers in mind. It will 
highlight data citation as a key theme for dataset page layout, and data discovery will focus on utilizing the multi-faceted inspection capability of our new knowledge 
graph. Users can search and browse through data-driven facets that enable improved filtering, and enhanced keyword searches.  

{% include image.html id="newWebsiteHome" position="right" %}

**_Access and Reuse_**: We’re keenly aware that our success as a repository depends critically on our user community’s ability to access and ultimately reuse the data we 
serve. So, data access in our new system will be achieved through multiple ways in order to accommodate our end-users’ needs. Data and related files will now be 
available right from the individual data pages via direct download. But, to provide enhanced options for data reuse (think: subsetting, filtering, and even automated 
ingest for scripting-savvy users) we have implemented the open-source NOAA-supported, ERDDAP data server (Simons, 2015). ERDDAP is a web application that provides 
features such as subsetting, filtering, data conversion to dozens of file formats, and even machine actionable URLs for automated filtering, data conversion, and 
viewing of data and metadata. ERDDAP does this while not imposing restrictions on how or where data are stored. 

We also received input from the community that downloading multiple datasets was an important feature that we currently lack. To respond to this need, we plan to 
implement a dataset “shopping cart” to allow downloading of multiple datasets at once. This service will be able to calculate download sizes, informing the user 
of any restrictions such as size limitations before any download takes place.

**_Capacity Building_**: We believe that as curators of data, repositories can play a pivotal role in building data management capacity within the research community. 
So, we’re re-envisioning our outreach and education efforts, collaborating with individual scientists, projects, and organizations to support data management 
literacy within the oceanographic research community. We can also serve as an effective vehicle for cross-pollination of domain science and technical skills 
among undergraduate and graduate students and have already worked with our first undergraduate intern. We’ve started to collaborate with teachers and 
professors to gather needs and develop training materials, and plan to host published data analysis modules, and notebooks for use with BCO-DMO data holdings. 
We’re working on a communication strategy that will help socialize scientists to the resources and opportunities we provide, and we began exhibiting last 
year at professional conferences like Ocean Sciences, to provide additional opportunities for engagement and assist researchers in solving data challenges. 

---

All of these activities together, feed the necessary evolution that will help BCO-DMO achieve its vision of:<br>
<strong>_An unparalleled data catalog of well-documented, interoperable oceanographic data and information, openly accessible to all end-users through an intuitive 
web-based interface for the purposes of advancing marine research, education, and policy._</strong> 

Over the past year and a half, we’ve made great strides toward realizing this vision, and will soon be implementing the components of our new system; many will 
be transparent to our users, but others will be a significant departure (for the better!) from the system that our community has helped build with us. In the 
coming months both data submitters and end users will see a vastly updated system that improves the acts of data sharing, discovery, and access. To help 
introduce the components of this new system, we plan to announce changes through Twitter and blog posts like this one; not only to inform the community of 
pending changes, but to provide opportunities for feedback.  So be sure to follow us on {% include link.html external=true url="https://twitter.com/bcodmo/" text="Twitter" %}, check out {% include link.html external=true url="https://blog.bco-dmo.org/" text="our blog" %}, and even look for our BCO-DMO related 
posts in {% include link.html external=true url="https://www.us-ocb.org/publications/newsletters/" text="the OCB newsletter" %}!

